---
layout: post
title: ant-colony algorithms
---

# Ant colony algorithms

Ants. Ants are awesome. We all know it. For instance, have you ever walked in the
countryside around July? And looked to the ground? There, you can always find
this long paths made by thousands of ants that work carrying food from the
sources to the ant-colony. Ok, I know, it's just a path. But have you realized
how insanely straight paths are?

Ants are canonical examples of what a "complex system is": *a system composed by
subunits with very simple behavior by their own that all together give place
to emergent features**. Ants can not go to college to learn engineering, but
they are able to build ant-colonies that dissipate heat; they have not
experienced the agriculture revolution, but they are able to seed some sort
of fungi to feed themselves; they have no...

While I was studying my master in mathematical modelling, I found that there
were methods of optimization called "ant-colony" methods, since they tried to
emulate the way under which ants find food and trace straight paths that ensure
that the colony will waste the lowest amount of energy trying to bring food. In
general we can resume the method as it follows:

1. Ants get out from the ant-colony in random directions. They can smell the
nest or colony, so they can notice if they are walking further.
2. When an ant finds a good source of food, it starts its way back to the
colony, leaving a trace of pheromones.
3. Those pheromones evaporate.
4. When new ants get out from the nest, they follow the pheromones paths since
they know they lead to a food source.

Simple right? but... did I talked in any moment about ants coming back using the
shortest possible path? Here is where the fun comes.  
